IPDB Table List Notes
---------------------

Update - 12/26/2020: The original source of PinballY's IPDB file was
essentially a "screen scrape" of the IPDB Web site, using the ad hoc
and somewhat manual methods described below.  Now, there's a separate
open-source project by Xantari that performs a more automated IPDB
screen scrape to produce a JSON file:

https://github.com/xantari/Ipdb.Database

Xantari's JSON importer does some of the same data normalization that
my process below does (e.g., it converts the manufacturing dates to a
consistent format), so it's probably a better starting point for
future updates/syncs.  However, Xantari's version isn't exactly
equivalent to mine (e.g., his formulation of the manufacturer short
name is different, he doesn't have an equivalent of the Alternate
Title field, and I don't think he normalized the Theme format the way
I did), so manual review will still be necessary.

My advice to anyone who wants to perform an update/sync to the latest
IPDB data would be to proceed as follows.  First, either perform a new
screen scrape of the IPDB list as described in the original notes
below, or start with Xantari's JSON data, and convert it to the same
format.  Sort alphabetically by title.  Diff this against my last
capture "ipdb/IPDB Alphabetical Game Listing capture.csv" in the git
tree.  New rows represent new games that didn't exist in the version I
captured.  Rows that appear in both but have differences must
represent corrections or additions of missing items to the IPDB source
data since my last capture.  In either case, make the same manual
adjustments to the data as described below (add an appropriate
manufacturer short name, normalize the manufacturing date, etc).
Merge the results into the existing CSV - add the new rows, replace
the existing rows with diffs.  Leave all of the other rows unchanged.

After performing this synchronization/update process, be sure to
update "ipdb/IPDB Alphabetical Game Listing capture.csv" in the git
repository, so that the next person who wants to perform an update to
the data you just updated has the right reference point to diff
against the then-current IPDB source data.

The approach outlined above should minimize the amount of manual
fix-up work, because you'll only have to look at new and modified rows
relative to the last IPDB sync, without having to review all of the
rows that didn't change.  Since IPDB's underlying information is all
historical data, the only changes in principle should be additions of
new tables that weren't in the database previously, additions of
missing information from existing entries, and corrections of errors
in existing entries.  Since IPDB has been around for a long time and
most of the tables in it have been around for decades, the rate of
error correction is presumably exceedingly low, so we'd expect
virtually all of the changes in any given update to be additions of
new tables.  And even that should happen at quite a low rate: there
can't be many historical tables left to discover that aren't already
in the database, and actual new releases from commercial pinball
manufacturers are only appearing at a rate of perhaps five to ten per
year these days.  I should think that updating once a year or so
should be adequate.


---------------------

The distribution includes a list of most of the real pinball tables
ever manufactured, based on the list of tables from IPDB, aka the
Internet Pinball Database (ipdb.org).  We use this to streamline data
entry in the game setup dialog when adding a new table file, by
populating pick-lists based on fuzzy matching the file name to titles
of known tables.

The table list data can be found in assets/IPDBTableList.csv.  The
format includes each game's title plus a few other metadata items.
This isn't a download or export of the raw database tables from IPDB,
as they don't make that available; this is just a point-in-time
capture of the table list as the site displays it in a browser.

The file uses standard CSV formatting.  The columns are:

    Name = the table's title

    Manufacturer = the full manufacturer name as listed in IPDB,
      or empty if the manufacturer is unknown

    ManufacturerShort = a short version of the name for the most 
      common manufacturers of games from the 1980s onward (e.g., 
      "Williams" for "Williams Electronics Games, Incorporated, 
      a subsidiary of WMS Ind., Incorporated")

    Year = year of original release, in YYYY format, or empty
      if the year is unknown

    Players = number of players, or empty if unknown

    Type =
      ME for purely mechanical
      EM for electromechanical   
      SS for solid-state

    Theme = a list of themes, delimited by " - " (space, hyphen,
      space) sequences.  These are populated by users of IPDB on
      an ad hoc basis, not taken from a master list of possible
      themes, so they're idiosyncratic.

Over time, it will be desirable to add new games to this list, as new
commercial tables come onto the market and old ones that weren't
already in IPDB are discovered.  These days, new commercial pinball
machines are only coming onto the market at a rate of three or four
titles per year, and IPDB is already complete enough that it's
probably equally rare for missing old titles to be discovered, so the
easiest way to maintain our list going forward is probably going to be
to simply add new tables to the CSV file by hand when necessary.
However, in case someone wants to do a new full sync with the IPDB
data at some point, here's the procedure I used.

First, you have to manually capture the game list from IPDB.  Use the
"Alphabetical game listing" link on the "Game Lists" page.  That only
gives you an HTML representation, so you'll have to convert this to
something you can import into MySQL or a database of your choosing.
One easy way to do this is to copy and paste the data into Microsoft
Excel, which will recognize the tabular data and create a usable
spreadsheet out of it.  From there you can use Save As to create a CSV
file, and then import the CSV into MySQL using the LOAD DATA INFILE
command.

The reason to import the data into MySQL rather than just using the
IPDB export directly is that you have to do a fair amount of manual
massaging to get it into a format we can use:

- Delete all entries with titles "Unknown", "Unknown (description)",
  and "Untitled".  These IPDB entries are for unique tables in
  individual collections, so they're not likely to re-created as
  virtual tables and thus not useful for our purposes.

- Add a column called MANUFACTURER_SHORT.  Manually go through the
  manufacturer list and identify the common manufacturers (Williams,
  Bally, Midway, Gottlieb, Alvin G., Stern, Atari, Jersey Jack).
  The IPDB lists all of these with the full official business names,
  and for the venerable manufacturers like Williams, there are many
  variations on the official business name over the years.  To keep
  things simple for our users, we use the MANUFACTURER_SHORT column
  to map these to the common short names.  You can use commands
  like UPDATE MY_IPDB_TABLE SET MANUFACTURER_SHORT = 'Williams' 
  WHERE MANUFACTURER LIKE '%Williams%', for example.

- Add a column called ALTNAME.  Manually populate this for a few
  games where the common name and the official name differ
  considerably.  The original example was "Avatar", whose official
  name in IPDB is rendered as "James Cameron's Avatar".  Filenames
  for virtual pinball re-creations aren't likely to use that full
  version of the name, and one of the main points of this list is
  to find likely matches based on filenames, so I added ALTNAME as
  a way to enter names that are more likely to match filenames.
  I also populated ALTNAME in my original set with the title
  stripped of the "edition" suffixes common in late-model Stern
  tables, such as "(limited edition)" or "(premium edition)".

- Add a column called RELEASEYEAR.  The IPDB data doesn't have a
  standard format for the RELEASEDATE column; the entries seem to
  be largely idiosyncratic, but fortunately there are only about
  five or six formats used throughout (YYYY; Month, YYYY; DD-MON-YY;
  and a few others).  You'll have to identify all of the formats
  in use and write UPDATE statements that populate RELEASEYEAR
  with the year taken from each format.  For the DD-MON-YY entries,
  note that the year is ambiguous (2000s or 1900s?), but at least
  we're safe for the next decade or so because the earliest game 
  using DD-MON-YY format as of this writing is in 1931.  This is 
  going to be a problem come 2031 if anyone ever uses this format
  for a new game - hopefully everyone has gotten the memo about
  the Y2K problem by now and knows better.

- For the THEME column, some entries in IPDB use ',' delimiters.
  For consistency, change these to ' - ' delimiters.
  

After massaging the data, you can export it into the final CSV
with a SELECT...INTO OUTFILE like this:

select 
 name, 
 ifnull(altname, ''),
 ifnull(manufacturer, ''), 
 ifnull(manufacturer_short, ''),
 ifnull(releaseyear, ''), 
 ifnull(players,''), 
 ttype, 
 theme 
from 
 ipdb
limit 
 0, 10000 
into 
 outfile 'assets/ipdbTableList.csv' 
 fields 
   terminated by ','
   optionally enclosed by '"' 
   escaped by '"' 
 lines terminated by '\r\n'
;

After exporting the file, edit it to insert the column headers as the
first line:

Name,AltName,Manufacturer,ManufacturerShort,Year,Players,Type,Theme

